America's top Diplomat who's on a visit
to Israel has said it's a decisive
moment and maybe the last opportunity to
reach a ceasefire in Gaza US Secretary
of State Anthony blinkin who's already
met Israeli president Isaac Herzog is
currently holding talks with prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu Israel and
Hamas have accused each other of lacking
the will to compromise Mr blinkin says
it's time for all sides to agree a deal
without excuses this is a decisive
moment um probably the best maybe the
last opportunity to get the hostages
home to get a ceasefire and to put
everyone on a better path to enduring
peace and security uh I'm here as part
of an intensive diplomatic effort on
President Biden's instructions to try to
get this agreement to the line and
ultimately over the line uh it is time
for it to get done uh it's also time to
make sure that no one takes any steps
that could derail this
process joining me now is our
correspondent Tom bitman who traveling
with the US Secretary of State and our
Middle East correspondent Yulan Nell
who's in Jerusalem and youan land the
stakes are incredibly high for this
visit aren't
they uh they are indeed and we know Mr
blinken's just gone in to talk to uh the
Israeli Prime Minister this is a meeting
that is taking place behind uh closed
doors um we don't have official details
but we know that the the US um is really
putting uh this bridging proposal on the
table to try to bring Israel and Hamas
together to overcome the outstanding
issues that following on from this Doha
Summit last week where you had the US
and Cat and Egyptian mediators present
along with an Israeli negotiating team
now if you look um at the comments while
the Americans are sounding positive I
mean really from the the latest
statements from Israel and and from
Hamas as well um you know not that same
positivity um certainly from the Israeli
Prime Minister's office um they're
saying that Hamas is sticking to its
positions of of refusal um Hamas has
really accused the prime minister's
office of adding uh new conditions uh to
the negotiations which they say are
meant to sabotage the talks I mean you
can look at the different sort of
sticking points as they emerged coming
out from from both sides um really first
of all moving from the first phase of
the three-phase plan um which is
supposed to be the ceasefire and hostage
release deal with Palestinian prisoners
being released uh from Israeli jails as
well uh and then moving from that first
six week phase into the second phase
which should be uh working towards a
full ceasefire uh that is a problematic
area you also have um where Israeli
forces would remain in the Gaza Strip
which strategically important locations
um Israeli forces want to remain in uh
after the Gaza War Hamas of course has
been demanding a complete Israeli
withdrawal from Gaza and and then also
so we're we understand there are issues
around um the Palestinian prisoners that
will be released from Israeli jails as
part of all this as well you landel
thank you very much over to Tom now and
you've been traveling with the US state
department parties and there's been
ramping up the language but what other
pressure can the US put on on making
sure that these parties come to
resolution well the way they are trying
to apply pressure is by creating a sense
of urgency and you heard it there with
Anthony blinkin saying this is maybe he
said the last chance and that there
should be no more excuses I think the
problem is that that sense of urgency
and in effect a deadline being imposed
by the Americans looking ahead to a week
from now where they're hoping to get
some kind of break through and to get it
over the line as Anthony blinkin has
said that deadline is being imposed by
Washington rather than the sides at War
here and that matters because for there
to be enough incentive for both both the
Israeli Prime Minister and the leaders
of Hamas to clinch this deal they have
to feel that sense of urgency too and my
senses we're not really at that point
and that's why I think the American
optimism is really outmatching what you
feel on the ground here the approach of
Mr blinkin who is by his nature a pretty
cautious US Secretary of State has been
quite a traditional one which is to show
sort of tough love when it comes to the
Israelis in general and Benjamin netan
who in particular is not one for the
sort of diplomatic arm wrench the
question now is about how tough and how
much love and I think um we're going to
see that over the next few hours he's
due to hold u a small press conference
here in Tel Aviv this afternoon I doubt
we're going to be hearing particularly
sort of critical messages against Mr
Netanyahu himself as opposed to many of
his critics both at home and abroad who
believe that he is sort of stringing the
Americans along uh for his own political
survival Mr Netanyahu himself says that
he's just simply pushing for a tough
deal against Hamas in order to ensure um
Israel's safety but the fact remains
that the Americans do not have a strong
track record in this conflict in terms
of
leveraging um the Israelis to change
course at critical moments when they
have wanted to now they dispute that
really uh when you push them on this
they believe that they did get the
Israelis to do more about opening up um
humanitarian assistance um and also to
to pull back the um scale of the
offensive particularly in the south of
the Gaza Strip but I think many critics
of the Americans will say they simply
haven't applied enough leverage and now
you have what they are themselves
describing as a critical moment where
they have to push both sides but in this
part of the trip Benjamin Netanyahu over
the line as they put it make him take a
deal and stop trying to squeeze more
concessions out of it I don't have the
sense yet that they're really doing that
and Tom briefly where does Mr linoln go
go next after this on to
Egypt yeah um we head to Egypt um
tomorrow uh crucially there will be you
know the Egyptians are one of the most
important mediators in all of the this
along with the kares um the role there
is that they're able to pass messages
much more directly uh to Hamas and Gaza
uh and so that is another part of
applying this pressure and the Egyptians
also crucial when it comes to that
sticking point that yolan was talking
about around the south of the Gaza Strip
because Mr Netanyahu said that he
insists that Israel will remain present
uh along the so-called Philadelphia
Corridor that's basically um the border
with Egypt Israel says that's to stop
smuggling and to stop Hamas rearming
Hamas say it simply means continued
Israeli occupation and therefore not an
end to the war so this is a fundamental
Point um Brett mcgurk who's one of the
key Administration
envoys uh here in the region has been
working on that with the Egyptians over
the last couple of weeks trying to
create this sort of bridging um proposal
which is meant to bring the two sides
together on this their statements both
of them last night were very defiant um
sticking to their positions digging in
that may be in part tactical in terms of
negotiations but no signs yet of a
breakthrough on that so I think what
he'll be doing in Egypt will be crucial
to that particular Point Tom bitman
thank you very much indeed